# Solid and Functional

I don't recall when exactly I first encountered
[RCM](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Cecil_Martin)'s articles on the
[SOLID](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID_%28object-oriented_design%29)-principles,
but it was well over 15 years ago.  By the way, the
[Single Responsibility Principle](http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/srp.pdf)
wasn't part of the original set of articles I read.  SRP and also the term SOLID
were coined much later.  Around the time I read a ton of books on OO and most of
those started with and were fundamentally about using *inheritance to model the
real world*, which is something I've found more harmful than useful.

RCM's articles on the
[S](http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/srp.pdf)
[O](http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/ocp.pdf)
[L](http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/lsp.pdf)
[I](http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/isp.pdf)
[D](http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/dip.pdf) -principles and his
earlier book,
[Designing Object-Oriented Applications Using The Booch Method](http://www.amazon.com/Designing-Object-Oriented-Applications-Method/dp/0132038374),
on the other hand, started with and were fundamentally about *managing
dependencies*, which is something that I've found tremendously useful while
designing abstractions regardless of whether I've been using OO or not.  Rather
than being the center of attention, the use of (abstract classes or interfaces
and) inheritance was merely the mechanism used for the purpose of managing
dependencies.

So, what are the SOLID-principles all about and are they really meaningful
outside of OO?

## Direct dependencies

Consider the following dependency structure:

```fsharp
Client -> Server
```

The problem here is that the *client*, which also corresponds to a higher level
program component, is directly tied to a specific *server*, or a lower level
program component.  While the server can be used by many different clients, the
client cannot be used with many different servers.  In other words, the client
is not parametric with respect to servers.

This is really the default way of how things end up in pretty much every
approach to programming.  In functional programming, for example, a function,
the `client`, that calls another function, the `server`, exhibits this
dependency structure:

```fsharp
let client ... =
  ...
  let ... = server ...
  ...
```

Similarly, in modular programming, a module, the `Client`, that refers to
`something` defined in another module, the `Server`, also exhibits this
dependency structure:

```ocaml
module Client = struct
  ...
  let ... = ... Server.something ...
  ...
end
```

Take a moment to think about the above templates.  Aren't those exactly what the
bulk of code in pretty much any language looks like?

Can we make a client usable with more than just one specific server?

## Inverted dependencies

To make a client parametric with respect to servers, we can introduce *a level
of indirection*, an *interface* or *abstraction*, that both the client and
server depend upon and thus break the direct dependency of the client upon a
particular server.  We end up with the following *inverted* dependency
structure:

```fsharp
Client -> Interface <- Server
```

In the context of specific OO languages, the term *interface* has specific
meanings, but in the broader context, there are many ways to specify interfaces.
For example, an interface can be something as simple as the type of a function
`... -> ...`:

```fsharp
let client (server: ... -> ...) ... =
  ...
  let ... = server ...
  ...
```

Or something more complex like the formal parameter signature of a parameterized
module:

```ocaml
module Client =
  functor (Server: sig
             ...
             val something: ...
             ...
           end) ->
    struct
      ...
      let ... = ... Server.something ...
      ...
    end
```

Written this way, the `client` function, or the `Client` module, is no longer
directly tied to a specific `server` function, or a specific `Server` module.

But isn't this much obvious?

## Abstraction must be strategic

As beneficial as it can be to create abstractions to invert dependencies, it
just isn't practical to write programs in
[fully-functorial style](https://www.google.com/search?q=fully-functorial+style).
There is a point where the plumbing becomes more trouble that it is worth.
Abstraction must be strategic.

Furthermore, creating an abstraction, some abstraction, is really the easy part.
Some tools even automate the act of
[extracting an interface](https://www.google.com/search?q=extract+interface) for
you.  The difficult part is coming up with abstractions that are worth the
trouble.

How do you come up with good abstractions?

## The essence of SOLID

This is where the SOLID-principles can help the aspiring programmer.  The
SOLID-principles are basically subtly different ways to look at, understand or
evaluate a design as a target for, with respect to or corresponding to an
inverted dependency structure or abstraction:

* **Single Responsibility Principle**: Are there multiple reasons for a module
  to change?  If so, would it be beneficial to introduce separate abstractions
  corresponding to different reasons for change to make the program more
  resilient to changes?

* **Open/Closed Principle**: Is there a way in which the behavior of a module
  needs to be extended or varied?  Would it make sense to introduce an
  abstraction and parameterize the module with respect to that abstraction to
  make it possible to program that module once and for all?

* **Liskov Substitution Principle**: What can the clients of an implementation
  of an abstraction assume?  What can an implementation of the abstraction
  assume from its clients?

* **Interface Segregation Principle**: Are there multiple different kinds of
  clients that each use a different subset of a module?  If so, could you make
  your program more resilient to changes by introducing separate abstractions
  corresponding to the needs of each kind of client?

* **Dependency Inversion Principle**: Does a high level module have a direct
  dependency to a lower level module?  Is it something that needs to be changed
  in some context?  If so, would it be worth the trouble to create an
  abstraction for the module and invert the dependency?

Take a moment to look through the diagrams in the article
[Design Principles and Design Patterns](http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/Principles_and_Patterns.pdf).
You will find that all of the OLID-principles contain the inverted dependency
structure as a part of them.  You can also see the same dependency inversion in
the diagrams of the
[SRP](http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/srp.pdf) article.

## Solid critique?

Recently I've seen many critical views of the SOLID-principles.  For example,
Kevlin Henney has given a talk,
[The SOLID Design Principles Deconstructed](http://yow.eventer.com/yow-2013-1080/the-solid-design-principles-deconstructed-by-kevlin-henney-1386),
and Lev Gorodinski has written on
[Object-oriented Design Patterns From a Functional Perspective](http://gorodinski.com/blog/2013/09/18/oop-patterns-from-a-functional-perspective/).
There are many other similar articles.

### Put down your dictionary

Kevlin Henney begins his talk by opening his dictionary to argue that the word
"Principle" is not the correct word to characterize SOLID.  Even more so, the
theme of grabbing on to particular words or paragraphs of historical texts
carries his talk.  I think this is one of the ways in which not being a native
English speaker is advantageous.  I couldn't care less about whether SOLID would
be called patterns, principles, laws of abstraction, idioms, monads or teddy
bears.  I also couldn't care less if there was a particular word or sentence
that I could extract from old texts on SOLID and then use that to completely
misrepresent it.  As a programmer, I only care about whether SOLID is
useful&mdash;and in my opinion it is.

Unlike Kevlin Henney, I do think there is something fundamental about SOLID.
But that is not the particular principles themselves.  It is the fundamental
principle of *abstraction*.  That you can decouple a client from a server by
means of an abstract interface and parameterization.  And as I argued, that is
the focus of attention in SOLID.  Abstraction is as fundamental as things get.
But it is not easy.  Coming up with good abstractions is hard.  Understanding
when an existing abstraction might be problematic is hard.  Understanding when
something needs an abstraction is hard.  And that is where SOLID helps by coming
up with different ways to question designs.

Now, perhaps Kevlin Henney's talk is just a joke and I'm a fool.  In that case,
shame on me.  But Kevlin Henney seems to completely miss the point of the
Open/Closed Principle.  OCP is about strategically parameterizing a module with
an abstraction to make that module invariant, or *closed*, with respect to an
unbounded, or *open*, set of implementations of the abstraction.  OCP is not
analogous to version control.  Kevlin, have you actually read RCM's article on
the
[The Open-Closed Principle](http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/ocp.pdf)?

**Update**: In the beginning of his talk, Kevlin Henney says:

> Who is familiar with Uncle Bob's SOLID-principles? [...]
> Because I'm just about to rip them apart. [...]
> On the other hand, I'm about to reduce this, because the Open/Closed Principle is a load of nonsense. [...]

At no point in his talk does Kevlin Henney say that there are two versions of the
Open/Closed Principle:

* [Bertrand Meyer's version](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open/closed_principle#Meyer.27s_open.2Fclosed_principle), and

* [Uncle Bob's version](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open/closed_principle#Polymorphic_open.2Fclosed_principle).

I hope his audience also knows this, because Kevlin Henney's talk isn't about
ripping apart RCM's SOLID-principles.  Kevlin Henney's talk is about taking the
names of SOLID-principles, ascribing different meanings to those names and then
ripping those meanings apart.

### Does FP make SOLID redundant?

Lev Gorodinski's article is about interpreting SOLID, among other things, from a
functional programming perspective.  Now, as you might know, I'm very much a
proponent of functional programming.  But I see things very differently.
Functional programming does not automagically decouple your clients from your
servers with well defined abstractions.  Really, it does not.

> In functional programming, the fundamental unit of abstraction is the
> function.  Given that a function has a single input and a single output,
> functions naturally have a single responsibility.

SRP is about having a single *reason for change*.

In the course of developing a program, a particular function may need to be
changed for a variety of reasons.  For example, a function that computes a
KD-tree for a set of 3D-shapes

```fsharp
val makeKDTree: seq<Shape> -> KDTree
```

might need to be changed to accommodate different kinds of 3D-shapes.  Or it
might need to be changed to use different heuristics for choosing the splitting
planes as different heuristics may be preferable in different usage scenarios.

That is two reasons for change and the function for computing a KD-tree isn't
even a particularly complex function&mdash;at least when properly factored.

> In a functional language, functions can be substituted at will and as such,
> there is no need to “design” for extensibility.  Functionality requiring
> parametrization is naturally declared as such.  Instead of inventing a concept
> of a virtual method and inheritance, one can rely on an existing, elementary
> concept - the higher-order function.

Take a careful read of RCM's original article on the
[Open/Closed Principle](http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/ocp.pdf).
The very article contains an example where a table, rather than inheritance, is
used to achieve closure.  Really, OCP is not about inheritance.  It is about
strategically introducing abstraction.  And, no Kevlin, OCP still isn't
analogous to version control!

Also, functions cannot be substituted at will to achieve extensibility.  You
will, in general, need to carefully define the acceptable functions, in other
words, give an interface or specify the properties of an abstraction, for the
purposes of parameterization.  For example, a higher-order sorting function
expects certain properties from the ordering function it is given&mdash;an
arbitrary function just won't work.

> Functional languages favor parametric polymorphism with bounded quantification
> thereby avoiding some of the pitfalls of inheritance.

This I actually agree with.  In particular if you just drop the bounded
quantification.  Parametric polymorphism is indeed easier to reason about than
subtyping and gives you a lot of power.  Whether or not parametric polymorphism
is the sole property of FP is another matter.

> Most ambitions of the Liskov substitution principle are effectively trivial in
> a functional language.

Even in FP you will need to carefully define the boundaries of abstractions.
LSP was stated in the context of abstract datatypes, but I see LSP and
[Design by Contract](http://www.objectmentor.com/resources/articles/Principles_and_Patterns.pdf)
as a much more general idea.  I see it as the idea of carefully defining the
boundaries, properties or contracts of abstractions.  And, yes, you definitely
need to do that in FP as well.  Think about
[monad laws](http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Monad_laws) or something even as
simple as the higher order sorting function mentioned earlier, for example.

> Functional programming reduces the need for encapsulation by eschewing state
> and breeds composition at the core.  There is no augmented concept of
> role-based interfaces because function roles are explicit at the onset.
> Functions are segregated by default.

Consider an immutable binary search tree type:

```fsharp
type BST<'k, 'v> =
  | Leaf
  | Branch of 'k * 'v * BST<'k, 'v> * BST<'k, 'v>
```

Now, why do you hide, or
[encapsulate](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Encapsulation_%28object-oriented_programming%29),
the representation of the `BST<'k, 'v>` type even in FP?

Because functions manipulating search trees expect trees to have a particular
ordering property.  Functions on search trees, such as

```fsharp
val tryFind: BST<'k, 'v> -> 'k -> option<'v>
```

do not work correctly with arbitrarily constructed trees.  In this case there
are two ways in which the `BST<'k, 'v>` type can be accessed.  Inside the
associated module, code can manipulate trees in arbitrary ways.  Outside of the
module only functions published by the module can be used to construct search
trees.

In fact, the need for multiple ways to view datatypes in order to allow them to
remain abstract, or encapsulated, is well recognized in the FP community.  Here
are a few papers on the subject:

* [Views: A way for pattern matching to cohabit with data abstraction](ftp://ftp.cs.cmu.edu/user/rwh/www/home/courses/modules/papers/wadler87/paper.pdf)

* [Programming with Recursion Schemes](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~tom7/papers/wang-murphy-recursion.pdf)

* [Extensible Pattern Matching Via a Lightweight Language Extension](http://research.microsoft.com/pubs/79947/p29-syme.pdf)

So, in my opinion, the reality is actually quite the opposite.

What I particularly like about ML-style languages is the module systems that
allow one to define signatures for modules.  Signatures that leave the types
abstract.  And, in particular, I love the ability to define
[multisorted algebras](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3753444/what-is-a-multisorted-algebra-and-how-do-i-use-it-to-solve-real-problems)
or modules that simultaneously encapsulate more than a single abstract type.
That is something that is often awkward, if at all possible, to express in many
OO languages.  In other words, I like ML-style languages, because ML-style
signatures provide a fairly simple, but expressive, language for specifying
encapsulated abstractions.

> As a matter of course, the declarative and side-effect free nature of
> functional programming provide for dependency inversion.  In object-oriented
> programming, high-level modules depend on infrastructure modules primarily to
> invoke side-effects.  In functional programming, side-effects are more
> naturally triggered in response to domain behavior as opposed to being
> directly invoked by domain behavior.  Thus dependencies become not merely
> inverted, but pushed to outer layers all together.

This is partly true.  When a module is free of side-effects, there is definitely
less reason to factor out dependencies of the module.

However, FP does not automatically make functions closed in the sense of the
OCP.  You will need to introduce abstractions to factor out dependencies to
implementation choices that need to be open to vary.

Furthermore, purely functional modules aren't really sufficient.  Consider
programs that need to interact with and react to events from the outside world.
The way such programs are implemented in purely functional languages is by means
of implementing imperative machines that execute them.  That doesn't really
automatically change things compared to imperative programming.  If you define a
program that opens a dialog box in response to some event then that program is
tied to the mechanism you used to open the dialog.  To avoid the dependency to a
particular mechanism, you will need to abstract and factor out the dependency
just the same.

## Conclusion

For historical reasons, the SOLID-principles were formulated in conjuction with
OO.  But if you look a little deeper into the SOLID-principles, you will see
that the essence of the SOLID-principles is abstraction.  The SOLID-principles
provide ways to look at, come up with, carefully specify, understand and
evaluate abstractions.  When interpreted broadly, the SOLID-principles are as
relevant in OO as they are in FP.
